bi188 Spring 2013 HW1 answer key


1) Multiple answers accepted.  Here is a typical answer:
 Promoter, in vicinity of the TSS, where the transcription initiation complex assembles to enable gene transcription.
 Enhancer, known to sit anywhere up to ~1Mb away from the gene, presence dramatically increases transcription level.
 Insulator, elements that prevent other long-range regulation mechanisms and epigenetic markers from spreading across them. 

2) Candidate maps:  Assume each copy of a gene gives you 5 sensitivity units (this is an arbitrary number; as long as the 
     math adds up, the number of copies per sensitivity unit doesn't really matter)

Gina: M and P alleles unknowable:  5 x OR-L; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G

Rose: M: 1 x OR-L; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G
      P: 7 x OR-L; 0 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G

George: M and P alleles unknowable:  1 x OR-L; 1 x OR-T; 2 x OR-G

Sue:  M: 7 x OR-L; 0 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G
      P: 1 x OR-L; 0 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G

Rick: M: 1 x OR-L; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G
      P: 1 x OR-L; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G

Jeff: M: 1 x OR-L; 1 or 0 x OR-T*; 1 x OR-G  
      P: 0 x OR-L; 0 or 1 x OR-T*; 1 x OR-G
      *The OR-T gene could have been from either parent

Tom:  M: 3 x OR-L**; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G
      P: 1 x OR-L**; 1 x OR-T; 1 x OR-G
      ** This part has variable answers.

Explanation for Tom:
     There are multiple correct answers here.  Tom's mother has one allele
with 7 OR-L copies and one with 1.  Tom's dad has 1 and 0.  If Tom inherited the
alleles as they are, he would have a lemongrass sensitivity of 0, 5, or 40.  To have
a sensitivity of 20 means that he either lost some copies from the 7-copy maternal allele or 
gained some from a 0- or 1- copy allele.  One way this could happen is by the same way CNV
occurs in the first place: there are "slip and slides" during DNA replication resulting in more
or fewer copies of OR-L in Tom.  Another explanation is that there was cross-over between the
maternal 7-copy allele and the paternal allele, resulting in Tom inheriting an allele with 3 
or 4 copies of OR-L.

Predicting how the three people will like the dishes:
Rose: lemongrass is pungent, tamarind is bland, and garlic tastes good
Sue: tamarind is bland and garlic is good
Jeff: lemongrass is bland, tamarind is bland, and garlic is good



3) USX is a piece of DNA (not a gene).  The question says that mutating USX causes a phenotype that looks like what happens if you 
	delete the shh product in the limb only (meaning that shh acts in other tissues).  

	Based on this information, USX is an enhancer that acts upon the shh gene.  Since mutating USX
		gives a phenotype that looks like shh has been deleted in the developing limb, USX is a
		limb-specific enhancer: i.e. it is involved in regulating shh in the proper timing and location
		for limb development.  

	It would not be likely for a homozygous deletion of shh to have the same phenotype.  The reason we know
		this is because the deleted USX phenotype is only similar to when deleting the protein coding 
		capacity of shh in limbs -- shh has roles elsewhere.  It is possible for shh to act normally
		at a basal level and in times/places in development when enhancers other than USX regulate it.


	